# Head, Heart, and Hands

My education has been unique.  Most people can say this for one reason or another, and of course they're right: everyone's experience is unique.  When I think about what made my education unique, all sorts of things come to mine (blacksmithing, writing my own textbooks, not learning how to read until 2nd grade), but one phrase guided many of these experiences.

> Teaching should address the whole child: heads, hands, and hearts. - Rudolf Steiner

Throughout my early years my learning consisted of truly equal parts thinking, working, and feeling. In the earliest years, all three of these are found in play.  All through Kindergarten, while my peers were learning how to read, I spent the vast majority of my time playing.  When the time came to read, however, the emphasis did not shift towards teaching more to the head.  Two hours a day were spent on topics like reading, writing, and arithmetic, but two hours of outdoor recess were still built in, as were classes like knitting and woodworking.  Fast forward to high school, and the balance remained largely intact.  While the thinking grew more intense, time was still allocated for working and feeling.  A month of every year was spent acting, imagining how others feel, and learning about yourself in the process.  Four hours a week were spent in hands-on classes like blacksmithing, woodworking and more.  Most of these activities could be found at any large university, so what makes my experience unique? I chose almost none of it.  Rain or shine, I went outside for recess.  Blisters or not, I had to finish carving my wooden stool.  Shy or outgoing, I was drafted into a play role once a year to carry out faithfully.  

Work with the hands and heart was treated by the teachers with the same respect and level of importance as work with the head. This attitude spread to the students, with what I think were healthy results.  Some of my classmates shone in areas outside of "head" academics, and those of us who excelled more in the thinking classes frequently found humility and a newfound respect.

In addition to being a great levelling agent, working with the hands and the heart yields some wonderful intangible rewards.  Working with the hands leant me a sense of self reliance, and pride.  Spending weeks to months making a single pair of pajama pants is obviously not efficient or remarkable.  Guiding a fresh piece of fabric through the treadle sowing machine, however, is one hell of a feeling, and the pajama pants are just icing on the cake.  Working with the heart helped me understand more about my self.  After playing a blustering, angry old man in a play, I got home completely exhausted and lay down on the couch.  I had yelled myself hoarse, and I could feel every bit of anger manifest itself as exhaustion.  By experiencing the reality of a character other than myself, I got a window into the cost of living angry, and I'd like to think this has guided me.

Now, I no longer go to Waldorf school.  I study computer engineering at a large university.  I choose my experience.  I take the classes I want to take, the ones I'm drawn to.  I spend 8-12 hours per weekday on a computer, and open the lid right back up on the weekend for homework and for fun.  Undoubtedly, I've neglected working with my hands and my heart to some degree.  I hold myself accountable to some degree: I did choose this major, I chose the school, and I choose what I do with my weekends.  At every job interview, however, I find I'm up against people who have somehow managed to get even more caught up in the head-work than I have.  Where I've done a minor in Music Recording they've done one in Math. Where I made a drum, they programmed a robot.

The problem is not only with me.  Society has pushed people to do what they're good at.  Good thinkers should do the thinking, good workers should do the working.  Everyone feels, but feelings are largely a consequence, not a commodity.  This model is undoubtedly efficient, and therefore it will likely persist, but it ignores a long term problem that looms ever closer.  For many years, people logged forests, without so much as a word said about the fact that people breathe oxygen.  In much the same way, thinking and doing are sent to separate people for efficiency, neglecting the fact that we each need both kinds of work to thrive.  Steiner is the only person I've heard of to address this on an economic scale (http://www.rudolfsteinerweb.com/Threefold_Social_Order.php).  While I'm sure there is plenty to be quarrelled about in the details of a system like this, I can't help but wish for a little more of a system like this while I sit at my desk all day ingesting information for a large company.  

One gaping hole remains, however: How can a less efficient system win out over an efficient model?  My only answer: Current models assume that people's work is required to provide the necessities of life.  What happens when automation has covered the necessities?  Is the efficiency of a human system even of concern then?


