# The Importance of Simplicity in Writing

I am a firm believer in simple writing.  That is not to say that I write simply myself, but I do try, and I hope to get better at it.  When I say simple writing, I am not talking about sticking to simple ideas, and I certainly do not enjoy it when writers oversimplify.  Simple writing to me is just a set of a few simple principles that can make a paper straightforward to understand, and meaningful to read, whether it is about Deep Residual Networks or the history of New England Architecture. So without further ado, what makes for good, simple writing?

Find and use metaphors that better convey complicated topics.  Reading multiple papers on types of gradient optimizers left me with no understanding of the topic, however listening to Andrew Ng explaining optimizers in terms of the physics of a ball rolling down a hill, I realized there was nothing to understand: this was a concept I'd known since pre-kindergarten.  Finding metaphors is certainly not easy, however a good metaphor makes a topic far more digestible, and in some cases may be the only way to explain a complicated idea.

Repeat only the important points, and only once.  A conclusion can be a great way to summarize your work and leave the reader with a final impression.  Repeating details inside the body of the work can both come across as sloppy editing, and a waste of time to the reader.  This seems to be accepted within most technical realms, however in the humanities I have read (and written) far too many papers which re-hash a theme no less than 10 different times, essentially using synonyms and different examples to describe the same phenomenon.

Know your audience.  This is a stupidly simple rule, but I have read countless articles that go into incredible depth about a topic, then spend a paragraph describing something at an introductory level.  This is not helpful to anyone.  Beginners are already, or soon to be, lost.  More knowledgable readers just wasted time reading something they consider common knowledge.  Split the advanced and beginner topics into two articles for two audiences.  Better yet, write an introduction to the topic for beginners that will prepare them for the more advanced concepts of your real work.

Can you summarize your piece? Yes? Then why would I read your full work?? Make sure the length of your work is justified.  Minimum word counts for papers are ridiculous.  Consider a paper to just be a thin wrapper around an outline, simply providing full sentences, smooth transitions, and occasional humor.  Stream of consciousness is a fun way to journal (that's how this is writing itself :wink:), but even poetry should be edited to have structure.

Finally a note: Simple writing is not simple to do, it is simple to read.  My process to write simply is to start with a clear idea, mangle it so it comes out complicated, then strip away the useless parts to hopefully end up with something valuable.  I'd love to learn how to just write well without the warm-up, but can't seem to figure that out yet... 
