# Origins of Life and Occam's Razor

Where do we come from? This is a ridiculously murky question that has an outsized impact on how we live. The fact is, we'll never have all the information on this question. We weren't around to experience it, so we'll never have a definitively right answer. There are several different ideas (God(s), chemistry, aliens), and the questions becomes choosing which of these scenarios seems more likely.

The tool I find useful for this is Occam's Razor. My interpretation of this idea is that complicated solutions have a wider solution space, and therefore a smaller chance of getting to a single solution. Basically, imagine putting together a piece of Ikea furniture. If the manual is one page, it's pretty likely that your final result will be exactly the same. Sure you could put the legs on the table upside down or flip the top, but if there's only five steps you've got good odds of doing them all right. If the manual is 100 pages long though, it is very likely that you'll mess up something and the final result will come out different. The conclusion of this is that when comparing hypotheses, the simpler ones tend to be more plausible.

All of the possible origins of life are unlikely. Any process that has led to our creation followed many, many steps, and we could have turned out very differently or never existed at all. In my opinion, the simplest of these possible formulations is the random chemistry experiment. At some point in history, the chemicals needed to create pre-cellular life combined. Out of over 10,000,000 planets we've surveyed, it doesn't look like this happened on any of those except Earth. It's obvious that this random chemistry experiment has a vanishingly unlikely chance of happening, but it's just that, a single experiment. In contrast, God based ideas introduce much more complexity. It becomes a chicken-and-egg problem quickly. If God created us, then what created God? It's not inconceivable that something has an infinite lifespan and has always been there, but it breaks laws of cause and effect that we've never seen broken across millions of worlds and I find it quite unlikely.
