# Human Physicality

I don't think we're anything more than a bunch of molecules put together in an oddly specific way. We don't have super-material souls or spirits, nor do we go anywhere after death. For better or for worse, we're nothing but bodies, animals, just another form of the vanishingly unlikely phenomenon of life.

My reasoning for this is a combination of Occam's Razor and my thoughts about determinism. First the determinism bit. It takes only a very simple system to produce complicated outputs. Take the three body problem for example. Three objects of different masses exist in the vacuum of space moving at different speeds. Where will they go? One force (gravity), 3 objects, this is a stupidly simple system, yet we can't make fast, accurate predictions about the output. Now imagine how a system with billions of gene base pairs and petabytes of life experience reacts. The idea of souls or spirits comes out of the fact that it's simply inconceivable that our humble bodies contain the sheer complexity to house our thoughts, dreams, and revelations. The Occam's Razor bit is simpler, and IMO less interesting: what is a soul made from? Have we ever seen one? What makes a soul more capable of this complex behavior than a body?

The natural consequence of intelligence, enlightenment, and sense of self coming from the body is that once the body is decomposing, the self that it contained goes away too. Thoughts of an afterlife, of separating the self from the body are a beautiful cultural artifact, but factually nothing more than millions of years of experience trying to lengthen and preserve our existence.
