# Determinism and Randomness

Are events pre-determined or random? While it's an abstract question, it has a huge impact on reality. My reality is fully deterministic. My reasoning for this is that in everyday life, the world is made up of systems which take a set of inputs and produce a set of outputs (yes, I write code, got me there). But think about it, a tree takes water, sunlight and nutrients and makes cellulose. A lightbulb takes electricity in and outputs light and heat. If you had access to all of the inputs, and a complex and accurate enough model, you could predict the exact outputs of any of these systems. The trouble is that often the number of inputs is huge and the system is very complicated. I don't want to keep track of the angle that light hits each of 2134 leaves on an oak tree, and even if I did, what would I manage to do with that information? The tree could also have memory. Perhaps last year's rainfall levels will still effect the tree's growth this year. Even a simple, stateful system like this can be nearly impossible to fully comprehend. 2 pounds of spongy brain computer isn't up to the task of modeling these systems and so we can't predict the exact outputs. 

When working with systems which are too complicated to predict, we use a tool called randomness. To clarify, randomness has no objective basis in reality, it is only a tool to simplify the complexity of the universe. Let's say we want to predict whether a tree will live or die. The complex way to do this would be to use all of the information that the tree has as inputs. How much water, and to which roots? how much sunlight, and to what leaves? The simpler way to do it is to sacrifice accuracy and instead use randomness. A random solution could look like "if the leaves are mostly brown this tree is likely to die". Such a system allows pretty good predictions without knowing almost anything about the internal mechanics of the tree, or its inputs.

Modern physics would disagree with me about the physical existance of randomness. As best I understand it, the current state of the art opinion is that while it is possible to make decent predictions of where an electron is likely to be, it is impossible to know the exact location. My opinion is that we just don't have all the information about the input or model yet. Imagine how crazy early astronomers must have gone trying to predict when planets would go into retrograde. Imagine sitting on a park bench imagining which flower a bee will visit next. With the right knowledge, anything is predictable, but not easily.

A huge implication of this is people and our actions. Are we predictable? If yes than is free will a lie? My answer would be that choice, just like randomness, is a useful tool to understand and simplify the interaction between inputs and outputs of ourselves. Billions of genes, and an unimaginably large amount of prior experience effects every small decision we make. Simplifying this hugely complicated system to a matter of "choice" makes our world so much simpler, and shockingly, we're still pretty good at predicting what someone would do in an imagined situation.
