# Wealth, Productivity, and Risk

## Wealth, Wants, and Needs

As the dominant economic system on the planet, capitalism has a huge impact on our everyday lives. As such, I think it's necessary to examine and understand the assumptions this economic model makes and where they might fall short. Some of the areas I think are weakest are assumptions about people's productivity, as well as the justifications for wealth being deserved, particularly explanations involving risk.

Understanding these weak points starts with the unintuitive nature of wealth. The common notion of wealth is that money is accrued through working. This idea can be seen very clearly in the fact that the primary way taxes are applied is via income and wealth is so tightly conflated with what job you have. The fact of the matter is, wealth is accrued by having wealth. That is as ridiculous as it sounds, but is not often addressed. The process of initially converting income into wealth is a very different game than using wealth to create more wealth. In order to create an initial amount of savings, it is necessary to consistently out-earn both the needs and the wants of everyday life. If this is done, then wealth accrual is exponential. If you loan money to someone, compounding interest will pay exponential returns. If you invest in the stock market that will do the same over long time periods. Even interest in a bank account is exponential.

Needs, by contrast, are generally constant with respect to wealth. Being poor does not mean that you require fewer calories to survive, or less heat in the winter to stay warm. Another property of needs is that they vary greatly in magnitude over time. While expenses like groceries and rent are predictable, ones like car maintenance and healthcare are large and unpredictable. One unexpected need can therefore wipe out years of early wealth accumulation. The result of this is that early on in the exponential wealth curve, needs will have huge consequences, while for people with a large wealth accumulation needs become trivial.

Not every expense is needed however. Wealthy people buy yachts and vacation houses and sports cars, why don't these expenses wipe out their wealth? The first answer is many of the largest costs of this type are recoverable. A vacation home or antique sports car actually has the potential to go up in value over time, making it an investment, not an expense. Yachts and jets obviously won't hold their value, but compared to rent and food which are fully non-recoverable, these expenses still have huge power as assets. Finally, many expenses in the "want" category can actually save money in the long term. Luxuries like buying new instead of used or buying instead of renting may cost more up front, but save money in the long term.

## Productivity

